2022/face-masks/README.md, before:

# Public health cannot rely on personal responsibility. That's why mask mandates are a bad idea.

Wow that's a hot take! But give me a minute to explain my reasoning.

As we enter yet another winter, it seems likely that COVID cases will rise and deaths will follow. It's important to note that the vast
majority of these deaths are from people who are unvaccinated. Be sure to get the [latest bivalent booster](https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-authorizes-moderna-pfizer-biontech-bivalent-covid-19-vaccines-use).

However, [vaccine adoption hasn't been high](https://erictopol.substack.com/p/the-marked-contrast-in-pandemic-outcomes). Most people have simply not gotten a booster. That's not good.

Mask mandates similarly live in the domain of relying on individuals doing the right thing rather than crafting policies that are resilient against
that.

If you put up a sign asking people to wear a mask, or ask them politely, many will comply. In general face masks are [good individual actions](https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/masks-after-the-pandemic)
to prevent spreading or catching respitory illnesses. What do you do with those who don't listen?

A mandate implies enforcement. A store with a mask mandate means that enforcement will be left to underpaid and overworked store workers. As we saw
that means [a number of 'Karens' harassing these employees](https://www.vox.com/the-goods/21318663/face-mask-karen-meltdowns-videos-trader-joes). While
we can pay workers at these stores more, it isn't going to make dealing with angry customers any better. Nobody deserves to deal with that.

Alternatively you can use police to enforce the rules. Do we really want to have police [micromanaging our actions](https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/public-health-now/news/nypd-enforcement-covid-mandates-reproduced-familiar-pattern-racial-disparities)?
I'd think that the same people most vehemently in support of wearing masks would also bristle when one suggests more policing.

## People should just do the right thing

"Everyone should wear a mask always because it's the right thing to do."

Public heath policies are not necessary because humans are rational beings. Economists [know very well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homo_economicus)
that humans act irrationally.

People should do the right thing, but asking every single person to wear a face mask gets into the realm of personal responsibility. You are relying
on every single person here, which is bad for resilient policy. People have gotten [burned out with mask wearing](https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/how-to-deal-with-coronavirus-burnout-and-pandemic-fatigue).
So many may choose not to do it, which isn't making policy any better. Rather, by focusing so much on asking people to do the right thing without an enforcement mechanism,
it does nothing to stop the spread.

Yes, COVID is bad and Long COVID isn't any better. But the goal of public health policy is to come up with policy
that works. At least, that should be the goal. Despite the MTA [only recently lifting the mask mandate](https://new.mta.info/press-release/masks-no-longer-required-subways-buses-and-commuter-railroads),
anyone actually riding the subway knew that compliance was fairly low. So the mandate wasn't actually helping anyone. It was bad public health policy.

## Things aren't hopeless

Good public health policy should be focused on minimizing the spread of disease and its fatalities. If it isn't, change the policy! That's a lot easier
than trying to change people's behaviors, especially without enforcement.

https://twitter.com/calebwatney/status/1575314496960307200

So you walk into a room. How do we stop you from getting COVID, regardless of whether or not you are wearing a mask? That should be the goal, crafting
policy that requires minimal individual effort. We shouldn't rely on individuals doing the right thing, especially since that doesn't scale.

Technology can play a big role here, and it can go far beyond COVID to include other respiratory illnesses like the flu.
Certain bands of ultraviolet light are able to kill microbes. We should use UV much more, especially in hospitals. It should be recognized that
UV light at certain frequencies are also bad for people. While we can flood rooms when they're unoccupied, it would be even better if we studied the
200 - 230 nm wavelength. It seems like this will kill microbes without hurting humans.

If this is viable, we should look to scaling this out immediately. Installing these in lights would kill many germs in the air
without drawbacks. Since the light is ultraviolet, we won't even see it working. Your days in the office will look exactly the same, except now you're
protected.

[Air filtration](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02669-2) is another avenue that we should scale and deploy rapidly. Studies have shown
that even [high levels of CO2](https://www.thinkair.co.uk/portfolio-item/indoor-co2-and-small-office-productivity/) normally found in office spaces are probably bad for us too.
In general, we should be doing a lot more to ensure our indoor spaces have ample amounts of fresh air.

In fact, going back to the MTA example, it's not clear just how much COVID was even spreading within the subways. They had already been designed to
regularly [cycle the air](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/08/10/nyregion/nyc-subway-coronavirus.html) within each car and replace it with fresh
air.

A lot of technology can be employed to not just keep us safe, but that can integrate seamlessly into our lives without constant demands or mandates.

## Masking is good

I'm not going to criticize anyone who is wearing a mask. They are good at protecting an individual. However, expecting everyone to wear
a mask forever is not realistic. It'd be great if they did. Public policy cannot depend on hopes and wishes. It needs to acknowledge limitations
and be as successful as possible despite them.

We also need to continue pursuing [a pan-coronavirus vaccine](https://www.science.org/content/article/why-efforts-make-better-more-universal-coronavirus-vaccines-are-struggling) to deal with any variant that comes up in the future.

Commit message:

Added a few more links to mask post

2022/face-masks/README.md, after:

# Public health cannot rely on personal responsibility. That's why mask mandates are a bad idea.

Wow that's a hot take! But give me a minute to explain my reasoning.

As we enter yet another winter, it seems likely that COVID cases will rise and deaths will follow. It's important to note that the vast
majority of these deaths are from people who are unvaccinated. Be sure to get the [latest bivalent booster](https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-authorizes-moderna-pfizer-biontech-bivalent-covid-19-vaccines-use).

However, [vaccine adoption hasn't been high](https://erictopol.substack.com/p/the-marked-contrast-in-pandemic-outcomes). Most people have simply not gotten a booster. That's not good.

Mask mandates similarly live in the domain of relying on individuals doing the right thing rather than crafting policies that are resilient against
that.

If you put up a sign asking people to wear a mask, or ask them politely, many will comply. In general face masks are [good individual actions](https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/masks-after-the-pandemic)
to prevent spreading or catching respitory illnesses. What do you do with those who don't listen?

A mandate implies enforcement. A store with a mask mandate means that enforcement will be left to underpaid and overworked store workers. As we saw
that means [a number of 'Karens' harassing these employees](https://www.vox.com/the-goods/21318663/face-mask-karen-meltdowns-videos-trader-joes). While
we can pay workers at these stores more, it isn't going to make dealing with angry customers any better. Nobody deserves to deal with that.

Alternatively you can use police to enforce the rules. Do we really want to have police [micromanaging our actions](https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/public-health-now/news/nypd-enforcement-covid-mandates-reproduced-familiar-pattern-racial-disparities)?
I'd think that the same people most vehemently in support of wearing masks would also bristle when one suggests more policing.

## People should just do the right thing

"Everyone should wear a mask always because it's the right thing to do."

Public heath policies are not necessary because humans are rational beings. Economists [know very well](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homo_economicus)
that humans act irrationally.

People should do the right thing, but asking every single person to wear a face mask gets into the realm of personal responsibility. You are relying
on every single person here, which is bad for resilient policy. People have gotten [burned out with mask wearing](https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/how-to-deal-with-coronavirus-burnout-and-pandemic-fatigue).
So many may choose not to do it, which isn't making policy any better. Rather, by focusing so much on asking people to do the right thing without an enforcement mechanism,
it does nothing to stop the spread.

Yes, COVID is bad and Long COVID isn't any better. But the goal of public health policy is to come up with policy
that works. At least, that should be the goal. Despite the MTA [only recently lifting the mask mandate](https://new.mta.info/press-release/masks-no-longer-required-subways-buses-and-commuter-railroads),
anyone actually riding the subway knew that compliance was fairly low. So the mandate wasn't actually helping anyone. It was bad public health policy.

## Things aren't hopeless

Good public health policy should be focused on minimizing the spread of disease and its fatalities. If it isn't, change the policy! That's a lot easier
than trying to change people's behaviors, especially without enforcement.

https://twitter.com/calebwatney/status/1575314496960307200

So you walk into a room. How do we stop you from getting COVID, regardless of whether or not you are wearing a mask? That should be the goal, crafting
policy that requires minimal individual effort. We shouldn't rely on individuals doing the right thing, especially since that doesn't scale.

Technology can play a big role here, and it can go far beyond COVID to include other respiratory illnesses like the flu.
Certain bands of ultraviolet light are able to kill microbes. We should use UV much more, especially in hospitals. It should be recognized that
UV light at certain frequencies are also bad for people. While we can flood rooms when they're unoccupied, it would be even better if we studied the
200 - 230 nm wavelength. It seems like this will kill microbes without hurting humans.

If this is viable, we should look to scaling this out immediately. Installing these in lights would kill many germs in the air
without drawbacks. Since the light is ultraviolet, we won't even see it working. Your days in the office will look exactly the same, except now you're
protected.

[Air filtration](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-02669-2) is another avenue that we should scale and deploy rapidly. Studies have shown
that even [high levels of CO2](https://www.thinkair.co.uk/portfolio-item/indoor-co2-and-small-office-productivity/) normally found in office spaces are probably bad for us too.
In general, we should be doing a lot more to ensure our indoor spaces have ample amounts of fresh air.

In fact, going back to the MTA example, it's not clear just how much COVID was even spreading within the subways. They had already been designed to
regularly [cycle the air](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/08/10/nyregion/nyc-subway-coronavirus.html) within each car and replace it with fresh air. Since the mandate was lifted [cases in New York haven't shifted dramatically](https://projects.thecity.nyc/2020_03_covid-19-tracker/?_ga=2.161623355.684988644.1648478426-1211936103.1645032061), so it doesn't appear to have a sizable effect.

Do masks work? Yes! But probably less than we'd like. A CDC report suggests that using the highest-end mask [reduces your chances of getting COVID by about 83%](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7106e1.htm), roughly a 6x reduction. That's not nothing.

However, a mask-only policy is simply not enough. People need to get vaccinated and we see that it's much more reliable because you don't need to remember to be vaccinated in every personal interaction. In fact, some data suggests that there's an 8x reduction in getting COVID in vaccinated people.

https://twitter.com/HandNF/status/1544777678561083394

The data doesn't break down into various boosters, but it appears that a vaccinated person without a mask is safer than an unvaccinated person with a mask. Both can be better still, but at what point does the base risk become so small that it is unreasonable to worry?

In addition to reducing case rates, you're going to be greatly protected from even more serious cases of COVID in the event you do get it.

https://twitter.com/EricTopol/status/1527701537144786944

https://twitter.com/AlecStapp/status/1541057464266678272

Not everyone can be vaccinated, for a variety of medical reasons, but that's not a reason to mandate masks. A lot of technology can be employed to not just keep us safe, but that can integrate seamlessly into our lives without constant demands or mandates.

## Masking is good

I'm not going to criticize anyone who is wearing a mask. They are good at protecting an individual. However, expecting everyone to wear
a mask forever is not realistic. It'd be great if they did. Public policy cannot depend on hopes and wishes. It needs to acknowledge limitations
and be as successful as possible despite them.

We also need to continue pursuing [a pan-coronavirus vaccine](https://www.science.org/content/article/why-efforts-make-better-more-universal-coronavirus-vaccines-are-struggling) to deal with any variant that comes up in the future.
